Breakdown of Work Done by Team Member 		{#workbreakdown}
=====================================

More details regarding team member's individual efforts can be found in the
Gantt chart, the Trello board, the communication logs, and Git commit logs.


John Uiterwyk
-------------

John Uiterwyk performed in depth research into the following topics:
implementing networking functionality in Linux using C, implementing multi
threaded applications in C, and managing shared memory in a multithreaded
application. 

John assisted with setup and configuration of the various project
collaboration tools such as Trello, Toggl, Google Groups, and GitHub
repository.

John was the primary developer for the following modules: sim_lib, tcp_lib,
tcp_server_lib, tcp_client_lib, udp_lib, thread_lib, timeloop_lib. John
assisted with the development of the following modules: client.c, server.c.
John implemented a significant portion of the networking components, designed
the shared memory solution, as well as implemented the simulation physics and
serialization/deserialization functionality.

John also assisted with developing the group presentation as well as
participated in the authoring to the project portfolio.


Virginia King
-------------

Virginia King performed in depth research on the following topics: 

Hardware accelerated graphics on the Raspberry Pi; OpenGL ES and EGL contexts;
animation; OpenVG and EGL; Free Software Filesystem Hierarchy Standard; Design
specification authoring and best practice.


Virginia was the primary developer for the display function and created
a tester function for same. She assisted with debugging using gdb and
valgrind.


Virginia assisted with the preparation of the design specification, the group
demonstration presentation and the preparation of the final documentation
including the collation and editing of group time and communication logs. Long
live gantt charts.


Stewart Johnston
----------------

Stewart Johnston performed in depth research on the following topics: Gnu
autotools; Building chroots for foreign architectures; OpenVG and EGL
contexts; Filesystem Hierarchy Standard; Doxygen documentation generation;
Threading in C; Creating cross-platform build environments.

Stewart provided guidance, support and instruction regarding linux
configuration and processes. He assisted in the programming of client.c and
server.c, sim_lib, udp_lib and display. Stewart created, continually  upgraded
and maintained the build environment.

Stewart commented and standardized all code modules for portfolio inclusion
and generated doxygen documentation. He assisted with the preparation of the
design specification and the group demonstration presentation.
